src/posts/2016-01-22-spreadsheet-as-db.md, before:

---
layout: post
title:  Using spreadsheet as a simple database
category: tech-talk
tags: spreadsheet libreoffice
---
Sometimes when you have to keep track of some data and don't mind processing it in a quick and dirty fashion, spreadsheet can be of a great help. So lets review the problem at hand- you have a set of text data and you want to keep adding, refining and querying on that set. So you face the need to use a database. For a smaller set of data of less than or about a hundred record items- using a spreadsheet seems to be more intuitive and fast. It's a great tool for prototyping more advanced solution later.
<!--more-->

## The basic process

- Use the first row as the titles of each column and *freeze the first row* so when you scroll down these column label shows. It makes data entry and query easier.
- For each column use a single type of data.
- Finally use *Auto filter* to query your data.
- As your data grows you might also find *conditional formating* to help you navigate around the data.
- For generating quick stats/dashboard *pivot table* and *charts* can be used.

## Example: An audio plugin data set

There are many free VST plugins available online. They are of varying quality and I wanted to test them before directly using them on music production. Over the period of a year, I have downloaded about a hundred of these plugins and they are of different types: some are synthesizers, some are effect processors, some works on midi, some are for audio visualization, etc.

As I install and test any one of them I put that info on the spreadsheet. Each plugin has entry fields for- name, type, installed, tested, rating and comment. Later it becomes quite easy to filter out these data by just using auto filter. Here is a screenshot of my VST plugin data set on LibreOffice Calc.

![Using spreadsheet for small data set](/images/001-spreadsheet-or8.png)

## Where to go from here

Sooner or later you might need more flexibility and scalability- in that case you might consider using a relational database. Exporting spreadsheet data to CSV and importing that into a database seems like a good idea.

For my data set management, I am thinking about using Python programming language and sqlite database.

Commit message:

Added blurb to the front matter of all blog posts.

src/posts/2016-01-22-spreadsheet-as-db.md, after:

---
layout: post
title:  Using spreadsheet as a simple database
category: tech-talk
tags: spreadsheet libreoffice
blurb: I wasn't a big fan of spreadsheets but that changed when I started using it to keep track of some data.
---
Sometimes when you have to keep track of some data and don't mind processing it in a quick and dirty fashion, spreadsheet can be of a great help. So lets review the problem at hand- you have a set of text data and you want to keep adding, refining and querying on that set. So you face the need to use a database. For a smaller set of data of less than or about a hundred record items- using a spreadsheet seems to be more intuitive and fast. It's a great tool for prototyping more advanced solution later.
<!--more-->

## The basic process

- Use the first row as the titles of each column and *freeze the first row* so when you scroll down these column label shows. It makes data entry and query easier.
- For each column use a single type of data.
- Finally use *Auto filter* to query your data.
- As your data grows you might also find *conditional formating* to help you navigate around the data.
- For generating quick stats/dashboard *pivot table* and *charts* can be used.

## Example: An audio plugin data set

There are many free VST plugins available online. They are of varying quality and I wanted to test them before directly using them on music production. Over the period of a year, I have downloaded about a hundred of these plugins and they are of different types: some are synthesizers, some are effect processors, some works on midi, some are for audio visualization, etc.

As I install and test any one of them I put that info on the spreadsheet. Each plugin has entry fields for- name, type, installed, tested, rating and comment. Later it becomes quite easy to filter out these data by just using auto filter. Here is a screenshot of my VST plugin data set on LibreOffice Calc.

![Using spreadsheet for small data set](/images/001-spreadsheet-or8.png)

## Where to go from here

Sooner or later you might need more flexibility and scalability- in that case you might consider using a relational database. Exporting spreadsheet data to CSV and importing that into a database seems like a good idea.

For my data set management, I am thinking about using Python programming language and sqlite database.
