src/posts/2017-10-11-making-of-flow.md, before:

---
layout: post
title: Making of the track - Flow
category: music-production
tags: reaper
---
Flow is a little bluesy track where I recorded audio (acoustic guitar and electric bass) after a long time, previously last couple of years I worked only with synths and it was all midi based setup. The music production workflow gets a bit different when you work with both audio and midi. I used reaper and free VST plugins and sounds for this projects.
<!--more-->

<iframe style="border: 0; width: 100%; height: 120px;" src="https://bandcamp.com/EmbeddedPlayer/track=942002446/size=large/bgcol=ffffff/linkcol=0687f5/tracklist=false/artwork=small/transparent=true/" seamless><a href="http://raziurrahman.bandcamp.com/track/flow">Flow by Raziur Rahman</a></iframe>

## Audio
In this music project I worked at 96kHz sampling rate in Reaper. Used FLAC as internal audio file format, which reduces the overall project size a lot. At higher audio rate it becomes difficult use many FX, so used audio freezing to render individual tracks to save CPU uses. 

## Timeline based arrangement

![Arrangements](/images/flow/flow-arrangements.png)


## Mixing

Used some free plugings from Variety of sound and tokyo down lab.     

![Mixer](/images/flow/flow-mixer.png)


## Cover art

Cover art was made in gimp. I was just playing around with gradients and filters.

![flow cover](/images/coverart/flow-cover-800px.png)

Commit message:

Added blurb to the front matter of all blog posts.

src/posts/2017-10-11-making-of-flow.md, after:

---
layout: post
title: Making of the track - Flow
category: music-production
tags: reaper
blurb: How the music was produced & some thoughts behind this project.
---
Flow is a little bluesy track where I recorded audio (acoustic guitar and electric bass) after a long time, previously last couple of years I worked only with synths and it was all midi based setup. The music production workflow gets a bit different when you work with both audio and midi. I used reaper and free VST plugins and sounds for this projects.
<!--more-->

<iframe style="border: 0; width: 100%; height: 120px;" src="https://bandcamp.com/EmbeddedPlayer/track=942002446/size=large/bgcol=ffffff/linkcol=0687f5/tracklist=false/artwork=small/transparent=true/" seamless><a href="http://raziurrahman.bandcamp.com/track/flow">Flow by Raziur Rahman</a></iframe>

## Audio
In this music project I worked at 96kHz sampling rate in Reaper. Used FLAC as internal audio file format, which reduces the overall project size a lot. At higher audio rate it becomes difficult use many FX, so used audio freezing to render individual tracks to save CPU uses. 

## Timeline based arrangement

![Arrangements](/images/flow/flow-arrangements.png)


## Mixing

Used some free plugings from Variety of sound and tokyo down lab.     

![Mixer](/images/flow/flow-mixer.png)


## Cover art

Cover art was made in gimp. I was just playing around with gradients and filters.

![flow cover](/images/coverart/flow-cover-800px.png)
