src/posts/2017-05-14-jekyll-for-blogging.md, before:

---
layout: post
title:  Using Jekyll for blogging 
category: tech-talk
tags: jekyll github-pages
---
For the last few months I have been moving my blog from Blogger to Github pages and spent quite some time and energy to learn the jekyll static site generator, Liquid templating language , git/github and front-end web development in general to make the transition. Why?
<!--more-->

Here are some of the reason why I chose [jekyll](https://jekyllrb.com/)/[github pages](https://pages.github.com/) over blogger/wordpress:

- Making customization to the site just the way I like.
- Keeping all the content/source to myself so that I can work offline.
- Keeping everything under version control so that I can keep track of my changes and do much more.
- Getting used to with the developer oriented workflow!

Currently I am on Windows and installed ruby and ruby DevKit. After some manual installation of required gems and using jekyll that way for a while, I found that simply installing the ```github-pages``` gem basically sets up the working environment properly so that just pushing the sources to github builds the site and deploys it. Currently, I am using the [Lanyon theme](http://lanyon.getpoole.com/) and have customized it to my taste! Overall, I am happy with this minimalistic but somewhat hi-tech setup!

Commit message:

Added blurb to the front matter of all blog posts.

src/posts/2017-05-14-jekyll-for-blogging.md, after:

---
layout: post
title:  Using Jekyll for blogging 
category: tech-talk
tags: jekyll github-pages
blurb: I started to like static site generators and decided to host my blog on github pages.
---
For the last few months I have been moving my blog from Blogger to Github pages and spent quite some time and energy to learn the jekyll static site generator, Liquid templating language , git/github and front-end web development in general to make the transition. Why?
<!--more-->

Here are some of the reason why I chose [jekyll](https://jekyllrb.com/)/[github pages](https://pages.github.com/) over blogger/wordpress:

- Making customization to the site just the way I like.
- Keeping all the content/source to myself so that I can work offline.
- Keeping everything under version control so that I can keep track of my changes and do much more.
- Getting used to with the developer oriented workflow!

Currently I am on Windows and installed ruby and ruby DevKit. After some manual installation of required gems and using jekyll that way for a while, I found that simply installing the ```github-pages``` gem basically sets up the working environment properly so that just pushing the sources to github builds the site and deploys it. Currently, I am using the [Lanyon theme](http://lanyon.getpoole.com/) and have customized it to my taste! Overall, I am happy with this minimalistic but somewhat hi-tech setup!
